zson spec (#1715)
brimsec/zq: zng/docs/zson.md

An _enum type value_ has two forms.  The simple form is:
```
< <identifier>, <identifier>, ... >
```
and the complex form is:
```
< <identifier>:<value>, <identifier>=<value>, ... >
```
In the same form, the underlying enum value is equal to its positional
index in the list of identifiers as an uint64 type.

## Discussion and Examples

> TBD: Add a range of helpful examples and also some that cover the more obscure corner cases.
> Example of pico-second timestamp.

### zeek
```
{
    _path: "conn",
    ts: 2018-03-24T17:15:20.600725Z,
    uid: "C1zOivgBT6dBmknqk" (bstring),
    id: {
        orig_h: 10.47.1.152,
        orig_p: 49562 (uint16) (=port),
        resp_h: 23.217.103.245,
        resp_p: 80 (port)
    } (=24),
    proto: "tcp" (=zenum),
    service: null (bstring),
    duration: 9.698493s (duration),
    orig_bytes: 0 (uint64),
    resp_bytes: 90453565 (uint64),
    conn_state: "SF" (bstring),
    local_orig: null (bool),
    local_resp: null (bool),
    missed_bytes: 0 (uint64),
    history: "^dtAttttFf" (bstring),
    orig_pkts: 57490 (uint64),
    orig_ip_bytes: 2358856 (uint64),
    resp_pkts: 123713 (uint64),
    resp_ip_bytes: 185470730 (uint64),

>     tunnel_parents: null (|[bstring]| (=25))

Reviewer: I'm not following what `(|[bstring]| (=25))` means, but maybe I missed something above?

Author: Good point.  This says type `25` is a set of type `bstring` and `tunnel_parents` is a null value of that type.   I need to elaborate that definitions can be inside the decorator.  I'll make this change now and after I implement the reader, I will then have more experience and context to write a better description of the decorator syntax.

> } (=26)

Reviewer: Oh, I guess the internal names are here for illustrative reasons

Author: That is output from `-f zson` and when writing a stream you don't know ahead of time which types might be needed.  If you write ZSON by hand or had an automated analysis that looked at the entire text, you could optimize the output by omitting unneeded type defs.

Reviewer: Hmm, would be nice to be able to output concise zson... but later!

{
    _path: "conn",
    ts: 2018-03-24T17:15:20.605945Z,
    uid: "CayJxr1WvNLdJ6L9B4",
    id: {
        orig_h: 10.128.0.207,
        orig_p: 8,
        resp_h: 10.47.23.178,
        resp_p: 0
    },
    proto: "icmp",
    service: null,
    duration: 4µs,
    orig_bytes: 0,
    resp_bytes: 0,
    conn_state: "OTH",
    local_orig: null,
    local_resp: null,
    missed_bytes: 0,
    history: null,
    orig_pkts: 2,
    orig_ip_bytes: 56,
    resp_pkts: 0,
    resp_ip_bytes: 0,
    tunnel_parents: null
} (26)
```

### enum

```
{ rank: A (<2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,Jack,Queen,King,Ace>), suit: H (<Hearts,Diamonds,Spaces,Clubs>) } (=card)
```
is the same as
```
{ rank: A, suit:H } ({rank: <2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,Jack,Queen,King,Ace>, suit:<Hearts,Diamonds,Spaces,Clubs>}) (=card)
```

### union

```
{ u: 12 (int32, string, {a:int8,b:ip} (=27)), |[27]| } (=28) (=ex_union)
{ u: "foo" } (=ex_union)
```
is the same as
```

> { u: 12 (int32, string, {a:int8,b:ip} (=27)), |[27]| } (=28) (=rec_with_union)

Reviewer: probably missing something but I'm not understanding  `|[27]|` in:

`{ u: 12 (int32, string, {a:int8,b:ip} (=27)), |[27]| } (=28) (=ex_union)`.

Looks like a set of `{a:int8,b:ip}`, but should't there be a field name before it?

Author: Good catch.  I had a typo here and will fix... the set of records is supposed to be inside the union type.  In a future PR, I will add more examples and add discussion of the examples.

# ZSON - ZNG Structured Object-record Notation

> ### DRAFT 11/30/20
> ### Note: This specification is in BETA development.
> We plan to have a final form established by Spring 2021.
>
> ZSON is intended as a literal superset of JSON syntax (not semantics).
> If there is anything in this document that leads to this not being the
> case, please let us know and we will address it.
>
> Regarding the state of the implementation of the ZSON format in zq:
> * An input reader is not yet implemented,
> * End-of-sequence markers are not yet conveyed in the writer.

> > TBD: add a ToC and section numbering

Author: Yes, I would prefer to merge with this TBD and add the ToC when it feels like the dust has settled.

in an ergonomic and human-readable syntax, to establish a well-defined
type of every value expressed in a ZSON input.

In addition to the human-readable format described here, the ZSON data model
is realized in an efficient binary format called
[ZNG](spec.md) and a columnar variation
of ZNG called [ZST](../../zst/README.md).
While ZNG and ZST are suited for production workflows and operational systems
where performance matters most,
ZSON is appropriate for human-level inspection of raw data
and for test and debug and for low-performance APIs where ergonomics matters
more than performance.

The ZSON design was motivated by and [is compatible with](./zeek-compat.md) the
[Zeek log format](https://docs.zeek.org/en/stable/examples/logs/).
As far as we know, the Zeek log format pioneered the concept of
embedding the schemas of log lines as metadata within the log files themselves
and ZSON modernizes this original approach with a JSON-like syntax.

## Some Examples

The simplest ZSON text is a single value, perhaps a string like this:
```
"hello, world"
```
There's no need for a type decorator here.  It's explicitly a string.

A structured SQL table might look like this:
```

> { city: "Berkeley", state: "CA", population:121643 (uint32) } (=schema)

Author: Ok, I'll add the space like the zson writer outputs.  Following the lead of jq here... at some point we could even add terminal color coding of the text :-).  I think for the type values, I will omit the space.  It's a different sort of thing, but we can change that later if we don't like it.

{ metric: "B", ts:2020-11-24T08:44:20.726057-08:00, value:0.86 }
{ metric: "A", ts:2020-11-24T08:44:32.201458-08:00, value:126 }
{ metric: "C", ts:2020-11-24T08:44:43.547506-08:00, value:{ x:10, y:101 } }
```
In this case, the first record value defines not just the new record type
called `conn`, but also a second embedded record type called `socket`.
The parenthesized decorators are used where a type is not gleaned from
the value itself:
* `socket` is a record with typed fields `addr` and `port` where `port` is an unsigned 16-bit integer, and
* `conn` is a record with typed fields `info`, `src`, and `dst`.

The next value in the sequence is also a `conn` type but given that this
complex type has been defined previously, there is no need to specify the
type decorators for each nested field since they are all determined by the
top-level record type.

The subsequent value defines a type called `access_list`.  In this case,
the `nets` field is an array of networks and illustrates the helpful range of
primitive types in ZSON.  Note that the syntax here implies
the type of the array, as its inferred from the type of the elements.

> Finally, there are four more values that show the ZSON's efficacy for

Author: Do you get the Internet with the ZSON?  :-)

representing metrics.  Here, there are no type decorators as all of the field
types are implied by their syntax, and hence, the top-level record type is implied.

> For instance, the `ts` field is an RFC-3339 date/time string,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, the `ts` field is an RFC 3339 date/time string,
```

unambiguously the primitive type `time`.  Further,
note that the `value` field takes on different types and even a complex record
type on the last line.  In this case, there is a different type top-level
record type implied by each of the three variations of type of the `value` field.

## The ZSON Data Model

ZSON data is defined as an ordered sequence of one or more typed data values
separated at any point or not at all by an end-of-sequence marker `.`.
Each sequence implies a type context as described below and the `.` marker causes
a new type context to be established for subsequent elements of the sequence.

Each value's type is either a "primitive type", a "complex type", the "type type",
or the "null type".

### Primitive Types

Primitive types include signed and unsigned integers, IEEE floating point of
several widths, IEEE decimal,
string, bstring, byte sequence, boolean, IP address, and IP network.

> Note: The `bstring` type is an unusual type representing a hybrid type
> mixing a UTF-8 string with embedded binary data.  This type is

> > useful in systems that, for instance, pull data off the network
> > while expecting a string, but there can be embedded binary data due to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> useful in systems that, for instance, pull data off the network
> while expecting a string but must tolerate embedded binary data due to
```

and include
* _record_ - an ordered collection of zero or more named values called fields,
* _array_ - an ordered sequence of zero or more values called elements,
* _set_ - a set of zero or more unique values called elements,
* _union_ - a type representing values whose type is any of a specified collection of two or more types,
* _enum_ - a type representing values taken from a specified collection of one or more uniformly
typed values, which can be either primitive or complex, and
* _map_ - a collection of zero or more key/value pairs where the keys are of a
uniform type called the key type and the values are of a uniform type called
the value type.

### The Type Type

ZSON also includes first-class types, where a value can be of type `type`.
The syntax for type values is given below.

### The Null Type

The _null_ type is a primitive type representing only a `null` value.  A `null`
value can have any type.

Any value in ZSON can take on a null representation.  It is up to an
implementation to decide how external data structures map into and
out of values with nulls.  Typically, a null value means either the

> zero value or in the case of record fields, it means the field is optional
> and the value is not present, though these semantics are not explicitly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
zero value or, in the case of record fields, an optional field whose
value is not present, though these semantics are not explicitly
```

defined by ZSON.

### Type Definitions and Contexts

> Type definitions embedded in the data sequence associate a name with a type
> so that later values can refer to their type by name instead of explicitly
> enumerating the type of every element.  A collection of mappings from name to
> type is called a "type context."  As bindings are read from a sequence, they

Reviewer 2: I think this reads better with consistent use of "binding" terminology.
```suggestion
Type definitions embedded in the data sequence bind a name to a type
so that later values can refer to their type by name instead of explicitly
enumerating the type of every element.  A collection of bindings from name to
type is called a "type context."  As bindings are read from a sequence, they
```

create the sequence's type context.  The context may be reset at any point in
the sequence, implying that a new binding must be defined from that point on
for each unique use of a type.

A type name is either internal or external.  Internal names are used exclusively
to organize the types in the type context within the data sequence itself and have

> no meaning outside of that data.  External names are visible outside of
> data sequence as named types providing external systems a way to
> discover and refer to types by name where the type is defined within the data
> sequence.  The binding between an external name and its type must be reestablished

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no meaning outside of that data.  External names are visible outside of
a data sequence as named types, providing external systems a way to
discover and refer to types defined within the data
sequence.  The binding between an external name and its type must be reestablished
```

in each type context in which it used.  External names are analogous to the notion
of "logical types" in Parquet and Avro.

> Internal type names are represented by integer names while external names are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internal type names are represented by integers while external names are
```

represented by identifiers.  When ZSON data is organized into a sequence
comprised of two or more subsequences where each subsequence has its own
type context, the internal names may be "reused" across type contexts to refer
to different types but external names must have the same type value across
subsequences.  It is a "type mismatch" error if an external name has different
type values across subsequences.  It is also a "type mismatch" error if any

> any type binding

Reviewer 2: Finish me.

Author: Fermat's Last Theorem.  I don't remember what I was about to say.  I will delete until it comes back to me.

It is an error for an external type to be defined to a different type
than its previous definition though multiple definitions of the same
type are legal (thereby allowing for concatenation of otherwise
indepdent sequences).

### Primitive Values

There are 23 types of primitive values with syntax defined as follows:

| Type       | Value Syntax                                                  |
|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| `uint8`    | decimal string representation of any unsigned, 8-bit integer  |
| `uint16`   | decimal string representation of any unsigned, 16-bit integer |
| `uint32`   | decimal string representation of any unsigned, 32-bit integer |
| `uint64`   | decimal string representation of any unsigned, 64-bit integer |
| `int8`     | decimal string representation of any signed, 8-bit integer    |
| `int16`    | decimal string representation of any signed, 16-bit integer   |
| `int32`    | decimal string representation of any signed, 32-bit integer   |
| `int64`    | decimal string representation of any signed, 64-bit integer   |
| `duration` | a _duration string_ representing signed 64-bit nanoseconds |

> | `time`     | an RFC-3339 UTC data/time string representing signed 64-bit nanoseconds from epoch |

Reviewer 2: Space instead of dash per https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7322#section-3.5.
```suggestion
| `time`     | an RFC 3339 UTC data/time string representing signed 64-bit nanoseconds from epoch |
```

| `float16`  | a _point string_ representing an IEEE-754 binary16 value |
| `float32`  | a _point string_ representing an IEEE-754 binary32 value |
| `float64`  | a _point string_ representing an IEEE-754 binary64 value |
| `decimal`  | a _point string_ representing an IEEE-754 decimal128 value |

> | `bool`     | the string `true` or `false` |

Reviewer 3: FYI, right now the implementation is putting `T` and `F` for these, so I guess one of them needs to change.

```
$ echo '{"foo": true}' | zq -f zson -
{
    foo: T
} (=23)
```

| `error`    | a UTF-8 byte sequence of string of error message|
| `null`     | the string `null` |

The format of a _duration string_
is an optionally-signed sequence of decimal numbers,
each with optional fraction and a unit suffix,
such as "300ms", "-1.5h" or "2h45m".
Valid time units are "ns", "us" (or "µs"), "ms", "s", "m", "h".

The format of a _point string_ is the subset of strings defined by the
JSON specification for a number that include the character `.` (thereby
explicitly differentiating from integers) or one of the strings:
`+Inf`, `-Inf`, or `Nan`.

Of the 23 primitive types, ten of them represent _implied-type_ values:
`int64`, `time`, `float64`, `bool`, `bytes`, `string`, `ip`, `net`, `type`, and `null`.
Values for these types are determined by the syntax of the value and
thus do not need decorators to clarify the underlying type, e.g.,
```
123 (int64)
```
is the same as `123`.

Values that do not have implied types must include a type decorator to clarify
its type or appear in a context for which its type is defined (i.e., as a field
value in a record, as an element in an array, etc).

> Note that `time` values correspond to 64-bit epoch nanoseconds and thus

> > not all possible RFC-3339 date/time strings are valid.  In addition,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> not all possible RFC 3339 date/time strings are valid.  In addition,
```

> nanosecond epoch times overflow on April 11, 2262.
> For the world of 2262, a new epoch can be created well in advance
> and the old time epoch and new time epoch can live side by side with
> the old using a typedef for the new epoch time aliased to the old `time`.
> An app that wants more than 64 bits of timestamp precision can always use
> a typedef to a `bytes` type and do its own conversions to and from the
> corresponding bytes values.

#### String Escape Rules

Double-quoted `string` syntax is the same as that of JSON as described

> [RFC-7159](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159), specifically:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[RFC 7159](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159), specifically:
```

```
123 (int8) (int32, int8)
```

> TBD: list the ambiguous possibilities so this is clear.  I think they are
> float16, float32, (u)int8, (u)int16, (u)int32, and uint64 as well as union
> values inside of union values.

#### Enum Value

An enum type represents a named set of values where enum values are
referenced by name.  The simple form of an
enum is a list of names, where the values are of type `int64` but
enums may be defined as set of values of an arbitrary type.

An enum value has the form
```
<identifier>
```
where the indicated identifier is the name of one of the enum elements.

Such a value must appear in a context where the enum type is known, i.e.,
with an explicit enum type decorator or within a complex type where the
contained enum type is defined by the complex type.

When a string `true`, `false`, or `null` is intended as an enum value,
a type decorator of the corresponding enum type is required to resolve
the ambiguity, e.g.,
```
true (<true,false,unknown>)
```
is an enum value of the indicated enum and is not the boolean value `true`.

#### Map Value

A map value has the following syntax:
```
|{ {<key>, <value>}, {<key>, <value>}, ... }|
```

> A type decorator applied to an map can either be one element, referring to a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A type decorator applied to a map can either be one element, referring to a
```

# ZSON - ZNG Structured Object-record Notation

> ### DRAFT 11/30/20
> ### Note: This specification is in BETA development.
> We plan to have a final form established by Spring 2021.
>

> > ZSON is intended as a literal superset of JSON syntax (not semantics).

Reviewer: It's a superset of NDJSON 🤓

Author: It's a superset of both JSON and NDJSON.  I will add NDJSON.  (zq won't handle top-level values that aren't records but the marshaler will handle any value.)

Reviewer: Yep, JSON ⊂ NDJSON ⊂ ZSON

type of every value expressed in a ZSON input.

In addition to the human-readable format described here, the ZSON data model
is realized in an efficient binary format called
[ZNG](spec.md) and a columnar variation
of ZNG called [ZST](../../zst/README.md).
While ZNG and ZST are suited for production workflows and operational systems
where performance matters most,
ZSON is appropriate for human-level inspection of raw data
and for test and debug and for low-performance APIs where ergonomics matters
more than performance.

The ZSON design was inspired by the
[Zeek TSV log format](https://docs.zeek.org/en/stable/examples/logs/)
and [is semantically consistent with it](./zeek-compat.md).
As far as we know, the Zeek log format pioneered the concept of
embedding the schemas of log lines as metadata within the log files themselves
and ZSON modernizes this original approach with a JSON-like syntax and
binary format.

### 1.1 Some Examples

The simplest ZSON text is a single value, perhaps a string like this:
```
"hello, world"
```
There's no need for a type decorator here.  It's explicitly a string.

A structured SQL table might look like this:
```

> { city: "Berkeley", state: "CA", population: 121643 (uint32) } (=schema)

Reviewer 4: I suggest using a different type name for this example, since `schema` could cause some confusion with readers that are thinking about 'schemas' from other data models. (`cityinfo`?)

Author: Good point.  I had thought about that too.  It is ying and yang because it is supposed to be the schema of the table but there's nothing special about the word "schema" here.   I'll add some clarifying text in this regard and change the name to `city_schema`.

> while expecting a string, but sometimes encounter embedded binary data due to
> bugs, malicious attacks, etc.  It is up to the application to differentiate
> between a `bstring` value that happens to look like a valid UTF-8 string and
> an actual UTF-8 string encoded as a `bstring`.

### 2.2 Complex Types

Complex types are composed of primitive types and/or other complex types
and include
* _record_ - an ordered collection of zero or more named values called fields,
* _array_ - an ordered sequence of zero or more values called elements,
* _set_ - a set of zero or more unique values called elements,
* _union_ - a type representing values whose type is any of a specified collection of two or more types,
* _enum_ - a type representing values taken from a specified collection of one or more uniformly
typed values, which can be either primitive or complex, and
* _map_ - a collection of zero or more key/value pairs where the keys are of a
uniform type called the key type and the values are of a uniform type called
the value type.

### 2.3 The Type Type

ZSON also includes first-class types, where a value can be of type `type`.
The syntax for type values is given below.

> ### 2.4 The Null Type

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### 2.4 The Null Type and Null Values
```

Author: This breaks the symmetry of the "data model" section describing the various data types.  The format section describes the values.  I will fix this by creating a Null Value section and breaking out the text here into that new section.
